---
title: "Packaging Swift apps for Alpine Linux"
date: 2024-06-02
hero: /blog/swift-alpine-packaging/hero.jpg
commentURL: https://mas.to/@remko/112548464611369818
relatedPosts:
- /blog/age-plugin-se
- /blog/swiftpm-coverage
---

While trying to build my [Age Apple Secure Enclave
plugin](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se), a small Swift CLI app, on
[Alpine Linux](https://www.alpinelinux.org), I realized that the Swift
toolchain doesn't run on Alpine Linux. The upcoming Swift 6 will support
(cross-)compilation to a static (musl-based) Linux target, but I suspect an
Alpine Linux version of Swift itself isn't going to land soon. So, I
explored some alternatives for getting my Swift app on Alpine. 

<!--more-->

You can find all the scripts used in this post in [the `age-plugin-se` repository](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se/tree/main/Scripts/alpine "Alpine packaging scripts").


## Option 1: Running a pre-built binary 

A first option is to use a pre-built dynamically linked binary compiled by
Swift on e.g. Debian, and get it to run on Alpine. 

Installing [`gcompat`](https://pkgs.alpinelinux.org/packages?name=gcompat) is
usually the easiest way of getting glibc binaries to run
Alpine. Unfortunately, this doesn’t seem to cut it: the binary crashes at load time (most likely due to incompatibilities of libraries such as libstdc++): 

```
Error relocating age-plugin-se: fts_open: symbol not found
Error relocating age-plugin-se: fts_read: symbol not found
Error relocating age-plugin-se: fts_close: symbol not found
Error relocating age-plugin-se: fts_set: symbol not found
```

The second recommended workaround is installing a glibc-based distribution in a
chroot, and set up the loader using symlinks, as described [in this
article](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Running_glibc_programs "'Running Glibc programs' -- Alpine Linux Wiki"). After
setting up a Debian chroot this way, the pre-built binaries generated by Swift
on Debian work as expected. However, having to go through this setup on every
installation just to get a simple app working is still a nuisance. 

## Option 2: Packaging a binary with loader & libraries

A second option is to create a package containing the
(glibc-based) Swift-compiled binary, bundled with all its dynamic library
dependencies, including the glibc `ld` dynamic linker used to load the binary. 

For `age-plugin-se`, I run the entire procedure from [a shell script](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se/blob/main/Scripts/alpine/chroot-build.sh "`chroot-build.sh` shell script") running on Alpine. The script has following 
steps:

1. Create a Debian chroot (using [debootstrap](https://wiki.debian.org/Debootstrap))

2. Install [the Swift compiler](https://www.swift.org/download/) (and all its 
   dependencies) in the chroot

3. Copy the sources of the Swift app into the chroot

4. Use Swift inside the chroot to compile the sources into a (glibc-based) executable.  

   This executable is loaded using the glibc `ld` loader, which will be bundled at a
   package-specific private location (`/usr/lib/my-package/ld-....`). 
   The loader is always hard-coded as an absolute path into an
   executable, so you need to tell the Swift compiler the full path where
   the custom loader will be located after installation. This is done using the 
   `--dynamic-linker` linker flag.

   All the dynamic library dependencies will also be included in the package.
   To make the linker find these (and not pick up the system ones if they exist), 
   you also have to set the run-time search path 
   of the executable to a relative path where these libraries will be shipped.
   This is done using the `-rpath` linker flag. Since the executable will be installed in
   `/usr/bin`, the relative path where the dynamic libraries will end up will
   be `../lib/my-package`.

   The full Swift compiler invocation looks like:

       swift build -c release --static-swift-stdlib \
         -Xlinker --dynamic-linker=/usr/lib/my-package/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 \
         -Xlinker -rpath='$ORIGIN'/../lib/my-package

5. Copy all files from the chroot dir to the system (or package) dir: 
   the resulting executable is copied to `/usr/bin`, and the dynamic linker
   (`ld-linux-x86-64.so.2` for `x86-64` platforms, `ld-linux-aarch64.so.1` for
   `aarch64` platforms) and all dynamic libraries (`libc.so.6`,
   `libstdc++.so.6`, `libgcc_s.so.1`, `libm.so.6`) to `/usr/lib/my-package`.

Note that, because the script runs commands in a chroot, it has to
be run with root privileges.

The [chroot build script](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se/blob/main/Scripts/alpine/chroot-build.sh "`chroot-build.sh` build script") can finally be integrated into [an `APKBUILD` script](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se/blob/main/Scripts/alpine/APKBUILD "`APKBUILD` script") to create a self-contained Alpine package:

```
$ abuild -r
>>> age-plugin-se: Building main/age-plugin-se 0.1.3-r0 (using abuild 3.13.0-r3) 
...
>>> age-plugin-se: Build complete

$ ls ~/packages/main/aarch64/*.apk
age-plugin-se-0.1.3-r0.apk
age-plugin-se-doc-0.1.3-r0.apk
```

The resulting package can then be installed on a clean Alpine system using `apk add`, without any other steps or requirements:

```
$ doas apk add ./age-plugin-se-0.1.3-r0.aarch64.apk 
(1/1) Installing age-plugin-se (0.1.3-r0)
OK: 237 MiB in 72 packages

$ age-plugin-se --version
v0.1.3
```


## Option 3: (Cross-)Compiling a static Linux binary

Swift 6 will support compiling a fully static Linux binary, using
[musl](https://www.swift.org/documentation/articles/static-linux-getting-started.html)
as its standard C library. The complete instructions for creating a static
Linux build of your app can be found [on the Swift.org
page](https://www.swift.org/documentation/articles/static-linux-getting-started.html "'Getting started with the static Linux SDK'"). 

Since you can even create Linux binaries using the macOS toolchain, and since 
there currently only is a Swift 6 build for macOS, I adapted the `age-plugin-se` 
packaging procedure to create a static Linux binary on macOS for all architectures.

Although the resulting static Linux binaries run fine on Alpine Linux, I wanted
to have a cleaner way of installing the package instead of just extracting the
package tarball somewhere. Since I'm building the binaries on macOS, and
Alpine's [`abuild`](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Abuild_and_Helpers)
package build system doesn't run on macOS, I created [a Go script to convert
the binary release tarball into an `.apk`
file](https://github.com/remko/age-plugin-se/blob/main/Scripts/alpine/dir2apk.go "`dir2apk.go` script").
This script implements the [APK package
specification](https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Apk_spec) in pure Go, and
creates and signs an `.apk` without relying on external tools (such as abuild).
This script is integrated into the GitHub workflow to package a binary release
of `age-plugin-se`.


## Package size

Here's a comparison of the package sizes of the above approaches:

| Package                                | OS    | Size      |
|----------------------------------------|-------|-----------|
| Dynamic                                | macOS | 252 KiB   |
| Dynamic                                | Linux | 1.2 MiB   | 
| Dynamic + static Swift stdlib          | Linux | 43.4 MiB  |
| Dynamic + static Swift stdlib + dylibs | Linux | 48.1 MiB  |
| Static                                 | Linux | 100.4 MiB |

The minimal baseline package is the dynamically linked binary on macOS, which
comes in at 252 KiB. This binary links dynamically against the Swift standard
library and all required system libraries.

Linking dynamically on Linux yields a bigger binary (1.2 MiB). This is because
on Linux, `age-plugin-se` compiles against [Swift Crypto](https://github.com/apple/swift-crypto), a drop-in replacement for the [CryptoKit](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/cryptokit) framework on macOS. Swift Crypto uses [BoringSSL](https://boringssl.googlesource.com/boringssl/), which is linked statically into the binary (contrary to CryptoKit on macOS, which is a dynamic system library). This causes the binary to be
bigger, although the size increase is still limited in absolute numbers.

Using dynamic linking on Linux would require the Swift standard library to be
present on the target system. Since Swift isn't always available on
Linux distributions (including Alpine), this isn't a practical solution.
By statically linking the Swift standard library into the binary (using
`--static-swift-stdlib`), the dependency on Swift can be removed. Doing this
makes the binary a lot larger, though: 43.4 MiB.

The binary with static Swift standard library still depends on system libraries
(libc, libstdc++, libm, ...). As explained above, these aren't available on 
Alpine Linux, so we package these together with the binary. Doing this adds a few
megabytes to the package, resulting in a total of  48.1 MiB.

Finally, creating a statically linked Swift binary, which avoids any dependency
on system libraries, results in more than double the size of the packaged
dynamic binary with all its deendencies: 100.4 MiB. I'm not sure why the package
is so much larger (maybe some link-time optimizations and dead-code elimination that
isn't done), and I don't think there's a good reason in theory for it to be
this way. I hope this is something that will be improved in later releases.
